Do you remember in the 70s any important proposal
that you sent forward that got turned down?
No, I really don't. Because what I always tried to
do is when I went up with something, I always tried
to have my P's and Q's in order and justification
and all like this. And I think that's one of the
advantages. of having the grounds report to a VP in
that you have an opportunity, you live or die by
what you say and what you do. During that period did
any, as far as you know, any board member or other
former student or legislator or anybody get
involved with second guessing any of these
things?
No. The only time We built a driving range for Bob
Ellis. For who? Bob Ellis, golf coach. This was
out, well, it was where the bonfire site is now. And
Bob had saved money from his golf school. Well, I'd
gotten some, arranged to get some fill to build up
the tee, and he had some targets out there for more
of the projects. Anyway, Bob didn't, it what
turned out he didn't have quite enough money and we
went ahead and finished up some of it out of out of my
budget wasn't you know a couple thousand dollars
wasn't that big a deal and then Bob I can't remember
who the board member was he was from Corpus Christi
I think Tony Fells yeah I think that Tony Hilton I
think that's who it was maybe Maybe not, anyway.
And so they were at some kind of a luncheon and he sat
by Bob and he said, got any problems? And Bob, I
don't know whether he realized what we'd done or
not, but anyway. He said, yeah, I'm having a little
problem with my driving range. Can't seem to get
anything done. Next thing I knew, I was in Howard's
office. And I said, hey. And I showed Howard what
we'd done. He said, well, there shouldn't be a
problem. So I went down and I talked to Bob. And what
had happened, he had mentioned some things and it
was taken out of context. And it created a little
consternation. Bob and I had a nice long, we're
good friends, we had a nice long talk and it all
worked out. But that's the only time that I can ever
remember that really some direct action from
something from a board member got down.
Trying to think of anything else. Did the area
around the MSC board quarters Did they require
special attention? And or that kind of courtyard?
No, that was one of what we called our Class A areas.
And we tried to, I don't think we ever had a real
problem with that area because we had, by then we'd
set up what we call a garden area system where I had,
and we ultimately wound up with I think 26
gardening areas on campus where that person had
did everything in that given area except the large
area mowing, the tree work, and this kind of thing.
And that was theirs. And they took a lot of pride in
that. What would be some other examples? Of
gardening areas?
Well, like the central area library, we'd have
probably had a gardener in each of the dormitory
areas. And what we tried to do is we did an analysis.
Now the MSC and Rudder was a little different story
because we had one gardener for that area because
of what it was, where it was and who was there, that
kind of thing. We had a gardener for the two
residences on campus. And like the
administration building now, and a couple of
buildings on either side of that, what we call the
engineering block, that was broken up probably
into a couple of gardeners. But that worked very
well because they knew where they were going to go
every day. And they knew that their foreman and
supervisor would be checking with them, you know,
if they had any problem, they needed to raise it.
And it worked extremely well. But talking about
the MSC and board quarters area, we never really
had a problem with that. I don't recall because
never got any real complaints. Oh, we might have a
complaint. We had a little litter. and they
hadn't, the gardener hadn't quite worked around,
you know, or something like this, but it was
usually, usually fairly minor. I'd get a call from
Bob Cherry, I guess. President's House. You're
all responsible for gardens around there. Yes.
Which of the president's wives was the most
pleasant to work with? I'm not going to ask the
negative.
We
never really had much of a problem. Ms. Williams
was usually the most outspoken, and that was
because I think she was used to dealing with Bob,
you know, because they had a very, very close
relationship.
I don't think, I know one time when Jarvis Miller
was president, he called Howard and said, they're
killing my trees. And we had several small red oaks
out in And with our water, the kind of sprinklers
that we had to cover the large areas, and with
particularly red oaks, and you get a summer like
we've had now and you're watering a lot, you get a,
what Goldwater and I call a sprinkler arc, burn for
the trees. And he said, they've done something,
they're burning the leaves. And I said, Howard,
now that's not what Jarvis says. And I said, well,
in all due respect, he's wrong. And then I got a call
the next day, and he said, you've got to do
something with the dang trees. I said, Howard, I
don't know what we can do. So we went out, and I think
we finally picked some leaves off the trees or
something like this. And fortunately, it started
raining. And that solved the problem. But that's
one of the only real problems that we ever had.
Which of the president's wives do you think was the
most interested in the shrubs, trees, plants,
flowers. Was there any that were particularly
interested in agriculture and floriculture?
Yeah, Ms. Williams was very interested.
And, you know,
Ms. Banver was to some degree She was probably the
second, I guess the second most interested, I
think, but the rest of them were always usually
very appreciative of what you did, you know.
Right, type is the, what I'm about to say doesn't
need to go in. It's not unusual, but I'm just
sharing this as an information item. When the
Williams building the old uh system building when
it was named in honor of dr williams mrs williams
was not here and the reason she wasn't here is
because on thursday before the saturday
dedication she was on the back porch of her house
which is now glassed in changing a fluorescent
bowl on a little step ladder and she had placed it in
such a fashion so she would be careful not to damage
one of her orchids she had a whole bunch of okay and
then leaning out to do that she fell off the little
uh stepladder and broke her leg my word so
horticulture had an indirect uh cause for her not
to be there in hindsight, one of the unfortunate
items that day is nobody said why she couldn't be
there. They just, because each speaker thought
that somebody else would explain it, or the
audience, everybody knew. Many people walked
away thinking she wasn't there because she was
still miffed at the campus. That's what I thought
when I read she wasn't there.
I told her about that omission later when I
interviewed her, and she said, oh my, she said, I
did promise Jack that I would never ever set foot on
the campus again, not long before he died. But she
said, I'm beyond that now. I've got it. And she was
here not long ago. Oh, she was? Yeah. She said, I've
grown up. I've gotten better than that now. Well,
time heals. Did you all have the responsibility
for providing flowers and so forth for various
social events? Yes. Oh, that's got to be special.
Describe some of the pluses and minuses of those
events. There must be some that stand out. All the
building dedications and things like this. I do
remember one time we were dedicating the, what was
then the new part of the Sterling Evans Library.
And I think it
also fell on a Baylor football game day. But we
supplied all the podium flowers and the
decorations, the greenery and everything for the
stage and whatnot like that. And so we had just
gotten everything set up good. This was probably 9
o'clock in the morning. And Steve Hodge was out
with all of his people. They usually did the stage
and set up the sound. And we got to the point where we
worked very closely with each other and learned to
stay out of each other's way. and a cold front hit
with all kinds of fury, driving rain and all like
this, and we had to pick everything up and move it
into, and there was a huge long hallway in the
building, and that's where we moved everything,
and I think they ultimately had the dedication
maybe there, as I recall, but I remember Jack
Williamson, that's the last time we were having
one outside, and that lasted for a long, long time,
you know, But, no, we did, as long as we had ample
notice, where we could do the planning and all like
this, there usually wasn't that much of a problem.
It was just something that we worked at and we did.
And basically because of my working with Bob and
his floral background, it worked out. We didn't
have any problems. Which president was most
thoughtful in expressing appreciation for the
work y'all did?
Well, I don't know. I
got nice comments from just about every
president. Uh, Jarvis Miller was always very
complimentary. Uh, Dr. Williams was
complimentary too. Uh, and Vandiver, uh, you
know, they, uh, can't remember. Oh, gosh.
No, we, we always seem to have, uh, the presence
always seemed to be very, very complimentary. of
what we did. Were there any sudden or obvious
budget changes, for better or for worse? In the
early 80s, probably 80 or 81. the coordinating
board said, we're going to have to reduce the
ground formulas behind him, but we'll make it up
next by him. And they cut it another 10%, you know,
and it kept going. We had a, um, and I don't remember
the specific numbers, but we had a,
um, and Paul, the justification line on the state
budget, um, acreage per person ratio. And at that
point in time, it was like one person per every six
or seven acres.
And that has degenerated until I think now it's
about one per every 15 or 16 acres. And I'm assuming
compared to all the other schools in the state, Our
ratio would have been the most extreme. Probably,
because of just the sheer area that we had. Ours and
Tech would have probably been fairly comparable.
And therefore the funding would have been less per
acre. Per acre, because we didn't have as many.
There were several ingredients. There were
linear perimeter building feet, And they were
acres of public areas, which included acreage of
public and maintained areas. That's what it was.
Streets, sidewalks, turf areas, this kind of
thing. And then there was a wage and business
national survey, a wage and business multiplier
that's set for the southwest area, I think. than a
student enrollment or a headcount factor in
there. And the formula, I thought, really worked
pretty good. We never got 100% of it. The most we
ever got was about 90%. And I got to thinking in the
later 80s, if we had 90% of the formula, there's not
much of anything we couldn't do. And as far as you
were aware, the formula was comparatively
equitable in the way it was calculated. Yeah. That
it did take in the appropriate factors. Oh yeah,
yeah. When they first started, they had so many
things in it that it was hard, it was just too
cumbersome. And so they brought it back down to
linear perimeter feet, and I tried my best to get
the Northgate wall and and all like that. Tom
Cherry agreed with me, but they wouldn't accept it
because you've got two sides to maintain,
essentially a long linear building. They kind of
saw through that one, I think. But it was worth a
try. As far as you were aware, which public
four-year school in Texas, leave A&M out of the
competition, which other school would you give
the highest marks to for their grounds? I don't
know, it's been a while since I've been to any of
them. Tech has always done a pretty good job. UT has
It's so crowded it's hard to say anything.
Southwest Texas does a real good job. Allen Goldap
over there I've known for years and years and years
and they do a good job and I haven't been to the
University of Houston in oh mercy 20 years I guess
but. All right as we go through the 80s do things get
better or worse? Oh they get a little bit better in a
sense. We were able to get some, and I'm not sure
where the money came from, some local
appropriations, I guess, too, because at one
point in time, in the 80s, see, we started picking
up a lot of the west campus areas, you know,
horticulture, medical science, that kind of
thing the and in the later 80s Easterwood Airport
the terminal building there's a number of acres
there that's public public areas and
We were able to, and then we had to pick up the corner
markers at University in Texas and George Bush in
Texas, and those add quite a bit. And then the
modular dorms came on. All that came on about kind
of about the same time. And one of the biggest
problems we had back in the early 80s, this had to
have been in 83 and 84, because we had such a
monstrous coal spill in December of 83, we could
not get plant material to do horticulture.
It simply wasn't available. It had frozen. See, we
had a... about 10 days. No, it was about a week, I
guess, that the temperature didn't get above
freezing here. And that's just terrible here. I
mean, as you well know. Are you inferring that you
all had plant material in the greenhouses you were
growing? No, we were having to buy the woody stuff,
and the nurseries, you know, were, because most
nurseries had gone to containers, not buckets up
above the ground, and nobody was prepared for it,
because the temperature started falling when we
left for Christmas break that day, and it went
down, and it stayed down. far well into almost New
Year's, I guess. Well, it was cold. But it took a
while to catch up from that. But we determined that
we did a survey and inventory. And we determined
that we probably had a half million dollars of
woody plant damage campus wide. Maybe it was
closer to 600,000, but it was
a lot of damaged plants. Down through the years
that you've been here, did you all attempt to grow
any of your own plant material? We grew a lot of the
small stuff, the ground covers and things of this
nature. We grew all of our annuals. I'm not sure
what they do now because, well, that's been scaled
back so, but all of our annuals we grew. Where were
the greenhouses? They were out at the Henson Park
grounds area. In fact, they're still there, I
think.
But, and we used to grow a few small trees in
containers. We would order what we call liners,
one- and two-year-old trees, and containerize
them. And that gave us a lot of material where we
had, we'd have an area that needed something and it
was not very, uh... not very costly to do that and we
could put out a few you know get them up four five six
feet where they could kind of defend themselves
and uh... that's where a lot of the trees like that
came from I know for instance the crape myrtles
that line New Main Drive coming around, we bought
those as small liners and grew them for two years
and bought two different groups. We planted the
first group up to the curve and then around the
curve the second year. And it took about four years
to do all that. Did anybody in a position of
authority at any level ever give any indication of
any favorite or unfavorite annuals? Grow more of
these and less of those? No, not really. The only
time we ever really had a problem is with the system
or the administration building bed. And we used to
try to crop areas like that at least twice a year,
sometimes three times a year. And particularly
when commencement was a little later than what it
is we could never get the pansies there and we'd
have to tear them out or on some other beds on campus
too you know you you you do all your planning you
grow the plants and maybe you have an extended
season or something like this and these are not too
bad they're still pretty good but these need to
have need they they need home and oh I'd get calls
why in the world are you taking out these good
plants you know and I'd try to very patiently go
through the explanation of why well that still
doesn't make sense well you know it could turn off
real hot and it'd be gone in 30 minutes you know and
uh but uh that's the only only problem we've ever
really had I think with annuals who made the the
specific decision of which annuals where? That
was kind of a community thing between Bill
Vitapil, myself, and whoever was working under
Bill in the greenhouses. We'd sit down and we at one
point in time we had all of our annual beds and we had
a kind of set rotation of different crops because
we tried generally never to follow one crop was the
same thing. You know, like petunias, we would not
plant those probably for two years just because of
inherent disease problems that you could get. Did
you have any favorites? Oh, yeah. No, Janet would
get it. She's back. What's your favorite? Oh, I
like the pansies for winter. Calendulas are good.
I like the petunias. they they don't stand up to the
heat quite as well the periwinkles or vinca are
good a real good hot weather crop but a lot of people
plant them too early and they start going down on
them and what what they do they get a fungal
infection on stems but you don't periwinkles
shouldn't be planted until probably late may
early june here because they're a lot like cotton.
They like hot weather. But, no, there's a number of
good plants.
Could we ever have done any Texas wildflowers?
Yeah, we tried to do some Texas wildflowers out on
what we call the sea pasture out along Texas
Avenue, and it didn't turn out very well. We had...
I guess when Vandiver was president. There's out
there, and I think Richard Thornton, who preceded
me in the grounds area in the early 60s, Richard and
I were classmates at Tech, but he had planted some
islands of trees out there. Some of the crape
myrtles came from the Riverside campus, the old
annex, and they planted them out in that open area.
And when we were trying to scrape up manpower to go
west and handle horticulture and places like
that, well, I talked to, I guess it might have been
Chuck Cargill at the time. He might have been my
boss in it, either he or Howard. And said, you know,
I need to try to gain some mowing time at least. So we
laid out some areas where those tree islands are
that we didn't mow. We mowed them a couple of tree
times a year. And that gave us enough manpower to go
out and mow around horticulture and places like
that. And in that, we tried to do some wildflowers.
And at that point in time, we weren't that familiar
with them. And we got a few going, but we didn't get
enough soil contact and then when the the terminal
uh, Eastwood terminal came in, we thought about
doing some out there and I couldn't get
permission. Nobody said, no, we don't want to do
that. You know, and I kept saying, well, this might
be appropriate, you know, and, and I wanted to do
something again on the sea pasture because I think
that would be very appropriate. And of course, Bob
Ellis now has his driving range out there where I
wanted to do a lot of that. But, um, they were afraid
of the, um, see how the the rattiness that it might
look you know what when it's going down I said
people look at the roadsides they understand that
you wait until they seed you mow them you know and
you go on I said it would save us a lot of money but I
never could and by then it was Robert Smith and that
didn't fly right uh in terms of the let's go through
the the vice presidents uh you first reported bob
cherry tom cherry i mean tom cherry tom cherry uh
clyde freeman hired vestal and vestal served till
about when
well let's see they vandiver split the job oh okay
so this so and and then Cargill picked up the what
they call it operations maybe or okay so you
reported then to Chuck Cargill yeah did your title
and responsibilities change no just what they did
they took Chuck wound up with grounds physical
plant
University Police, the airport, and there was
probably one other. No, that's about it. And then
Howard kept the fiscal area, personnel, the
auxiliaries, you know, that was kind of a split on
it. What was Chuck Kergel's management style?
Chuck was one of those that when he knew something,
you knew it. And Joe Esterly, who was director of
physical at the time, used to kid him for having
Teflon overcoat because nothing stuck to that
guy. You know, I like Chuck. Chuck's a good friend.
But, I mean, any time he found out something,
either Joe or I or Bob White, or all of us found out
about it, depending on where the impetus went, you
know, of the need. And he used to always say, he
said, you guys do such a good job. I said, boy,
you're just, you know, I don't know what I'd do
without you. And, you know, we had a great
relationship, really. I mean, because he went, I
mean, the minute he found out something, you knew
it. Who followed you? Robert Smith. his style was
one of everything was close to the vest and Robert
didn't tell you anything that he didn't think he
didn't perceive you might need to know period
that's just the way he was and going from Cargill to
Robert Smith was really a shock yeah back in the
late in the early 70s when I was first dean of
faculty was the associate vice president of
academic affairs and I remember one day we had a
session at the working level with Robert Smith and
Dick said when he dies they're gonna have to hire
pallbearers so then so you reported to Robert
throughout his Robert took over in 87, I think. And
then, I guess in probably early, late 89, Robert
replaced Joe Estrill. He and Joe got into
something, I don't know. I'm not sure what it was. I
know they had some, they would have some strong
discussions on staff meeting, you know. But
anyway, and then suddenly he moved Joe to
associate director for utilities.
And then early in 90, a guy by the name of Joe Sugg
appeared. Sugg, S-U-G-G. Joe was an Air Force
colonel, retired. And
had